ARTICLE 6
BILL OF RIGHTS
Section 6.1 Conduct of Disciplinary Investigation
Whenever a Sergeant covered by this Agreement is the subject of a disciplinary
investigation other than summary punishment, the interrogation will be conducted in the
following manner:
A.
The interrogation of the Sergeant, other than in the initial stage of the
investigation, shall be scheduled at a reasonable time, preferably while the Sergeant is on duty,
or, if feasible, during daylight hours.
B.
The interrogation, depending upon the allegation, will normally take place at the
Sergeant's Unit of assignment, the Independent Police Review Authority, the Internal Affairs
Division or other appropriate location.
Prior to an interrogation, the Sergeant under investigation shall be informed of the
C.
identities of the person in charge of the investigation, the interrogation officer and all persons
present during the interrogation. When a formal statement is being taken, all questions directed
to the Sergeant under interrogation shall be asked by and through one interrogator.
D.
Unless the Superintendent specifically authorizes in writing, no complaint or
allegation of any misconduct concerning any incident or event which occurred five (5) years
prior to the date the complaint or allegation became known to the Department shall be made the
subject of a Complaint Register investigation or be re-opened or re-investigated after five (5)
years from the date the Complaint Register number was issued.
E.
No anonymous complaint made against a Sergeant shall be made the subject of a
Complaint Register investigation, unless the allegation is a violation of the Illinois Criminal
Code, the criminal code of another state of the United States or a criminal violation of a federal
statute.
No anonymous complaint regarding residency or medical roll abuse shall be made
F.
the subject of a Complaint Register investigation until verified. No ramifications will result
regarding issues other than residency or medical roll abuse from information discovered during
an investigation of an anonymous complaint regarding residency or medical roll abuse, unless of
a criminal nature as defined in the preceding paragraph.
Immediately prior to the interrogation of a Sergeant under investigation, the
G.
Sergeant shall be informed, in writing, of the nature of the complaint, the names of all
complainants and the specific date, time and, if relevant, location of the incident.
The length of interrogation sessions will be reasonable with reasonable
H.
interruptions permitted for personal necessities, meals, telephone calls and rest.
A Sergeant under interrogation shall not be threatened with transfer, dismissal or
I.
disciplinary action or promised a reward as an inducement to provide information relating to the
incident under investigation or for exercising any rights contained herein.
A Sergeant under investigation will be provided with a copy of any and all
J.
statements the Sergeant has made that are recorded either audio electronically or in writing
within seventy-two (72) hours of the time the statement was made. In the event a reinterrogation of the Sergeant is required within the seventy-two- (72-) hour period following the
initial interrogation, the Sergeant will be provided with a copy of his/her initial statement before
the subsequent interrogation.
If the allegation under investigation indicates a recommendation for separation is
K.
probable against the Sergeant, the Sergeant will be given the statutory administrative
proceedings rights, or, if the allegation indicates criminal prosecution is probable against the
Sergeant, the Sergeant will be given the constitutional rights concerning self-incrimination prior
to the commencement of the interrogation.
A Sergeant under interrogation shall have the right to be represented by counsel
L.
of his/her own choice and to have that counsel present at all times during the interrogation,
and/or, at the request of the Sergeant under interrogation, the Sergeant shall have the right to be
represented by a representative of Unit 156-Sergeants and to have that representative present at
all times during the interrogation. The Unit 156-Sergeants representative shall be a Sergeant
covered by Article 17 or an off-duty Sergeant designated by Unit 156-Sergeants. The
interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time until representation can be obtained.
Prior to the imposition of discipline, the Sergeant will be informed of the rule
M.
violated and the corresponding specifications of misconduct, including the date, time, location
and manner in which the rule was violated.
The provisions of this Agreement shall be deemed to authorize the Independent
N.
Police Review Authority and the Internal Affairs Division to require Sergeants under
interrogation to provide audio-recorded statements, provided that the provisions in Section 6.1
are satisfied.
If a Sergeant provides a statement during the investigation conducted promptly
O.
following a shooting incident and then is later interrogated by the Independent Police Review
Authority or the Internal Affairs Division as part of an investigation related to such incident, the
Sergeant shall be provided with a copy of the portion of any official report that purportedly
summarizes his/her prior statement before the interrogation.
